Data Examination Results
========================

This project is developing a new dataset for use by income and payroll
tax microsimulation models.  The project is progressing in several
phases.  At the end of each phase the current dataset is used as input
to a tax microsimulation model to generate several basic tax
statistics for calendar year 2023.  These statistics are then compared
with corresponding estimates generated by federal agencies using their
more comprehensive data.  Examining the differences between the
statistics generated from this project's data and the statistics
published by the federal agencies should provide ideas about how to
improve the development of this project's dataset.

For more on the source of the federal agency estimates and on how the
model-plus-dataset estimates are generated, see the [examination
methods](./methods.md) document.

<br>

**CY2023 Payroll Tax Liability** ($ billion)<br>
(federal employee plus employer share)
| Amount | Source |
| ---:   | :---   |
| 1580.0 | CBO    |
| 1696.7 | Tax-Calculator + phase 1 dataset |
| 1482.1 | Tax-Calculator + taxdata dataset |

<br>

**CY2023 Individual Income Tax Liability** ($ billion)<br>
(federal individual income tax)
| Amount | Source |
| ---:   | :---   |
| 2512.3 | CBO    |
| 2012.9 | Tax-Calculator + phase 1 dataset |
| 2154.4 | Tax-Calculator + taxdata dataset |

<br>

**CY2023 CTC Tax Expenditure** ($ billion)<br>
(from the federal child tax credit)
| Amount | Source |
| ---:   | :---   |
| 122.1  | JCT    |
| 108.6  | TSY    |
| 113.9  | Tax-Calculator + phase 1 dataset |
| 126.6  | Tax-Calculator + taxdata dataset |

<br>

**CY2023 EITC Tax Expenditure** ($ billion)<br>
(from the federal earned income credit)
| Amount | Source |
| ---:   | :---   |
| 71.9   | JCT    |
| 63.6   | TSY    |
| 64.0   | Tax-Calculator + phase 1 dataset |
| 75.0   | Tax-Calculator + taxdata dataset |

<br>

**CY2023 SSBEN Tax Expenditure** ($ billion)<br>
(from excluding some social security benefits from federal AGI)
| Amount | Source |
| ---:   | :---   |
| 45.9   | JCT    |
| 31.4   | TSY    |
| 46.9   | Tax-Calculator + phase 1 dataset |
| 58.4   | Tax-Calculator + taxdata dataset |

<br>

**CY2023 NIIT Tax Expenditure** ($ billion)<br>
(from the 3.8% federal surtax on investment income)
| Amount | Source |
| ---:   | :---   |
| -56.5  | JCT    |
| ----   | TSY    |
| -69.2  | Tax-Calculator + phase 1 dataset |
| -56.6  | Tax-Calculator + taxdata dataset |

<br>

**CY2023 CGQD Tax Expenditure** ($ billion)<br>
(from taxing long-term capital gains and qualified dividends at lower federal rates)
| Amount | Source |
| ---:   | :---   |
| 259.3  | JCT    |
| 153.9  | TSY    |
| 292.7  | Tax-Calculator + phase 1 dataset |
| 224.5  | Tax-Calculator + taxdata dataset |

<br>

**CY2023 QBID Tax Expenditure** ($ billion)<br>
(from the 20% federal qualified business income deduction)
| Amount | Source |
| ---:   | :---   |
| 56.2   | JCT    |
| 50.4   | TSY    |
| 16.6   | Tax-Calculator + phase 1 dataset |
| 18.2   | Tax-Calculator + taxdata dataset |

<br>

**CY2023 SALT Tax Expenditure** ($ billion)<br>
(from itemized deduction of state and local income/sales/property taxes)
| Amount | Source |
| ---:   | :---   |
| 21.2   | JCT    |
| 26.5   | TSY    |
|  0.4   | Tax-Calculator + phase 1 dataset |
| 29.0   | Tax-Calculator + taxdata dataset |

<br>


Comments on Phase 1 Dataset
---------------------------

The phase 1 dataset, which is a flat-file version of the
Policyengine-US (0.680.0) 2023 PUF-enhanced CPS input dataset, does a
pretty good job of getting close to federal agency estimates in most
cases.

The fact that it overestimates (relative to CBO) payroll tax liability
by about 7% yet underestimates income tax liability (relative to CBO)
by about 20%, suggests the possibility that high earnings may be
underrepresented in the phase 1 dataset and/or unearned income may be
underrepresented in the phase 1 dataset.  There are plans in future
phases to do more detailed calculations that should illuminate the
reasons for these discrepancies.

The phase 1 dataset estimates for the CTC, EITC, and SSBEN tax
expenditures are reasonably close to the JCT and TSY tax expenditure
estimates.  The fact that the NIIT and CGQD tax expenditure estimates
are noticeably above the JCT estimates (NIIT by about 22% and CGQD by
almost 13%) suggests that investment income, especially among high-AGI
tax units, is overrepresented.  This is interesting because it casts
doubt on the suggestion made in the previous paragraph that unearned
income might be underrepresented in the phase 1 dataset.

The phase 1 dataset estimates for the QBID tax expenditure is
significantly lower than either federal agency estimate: about 70%
lower than JCT and about 67% lower than TSY.  The model has been
extensively tested with a variety of hypothetical tax units with
qualified business income, so there is confidence that the model
represents the QBID tax rules correctly.  However, there is a shortage
of publicly-available information about the attributes of the
businesses generating the qualified business income, and it is exactly
that kind of business information that is required to estimate
accurately the QBID tax expenditure.

And finally, Tax-Calculator does not include any logic for the
Affordable Care Act premium tax credit, so it is impossible to
generate an estimate of this tax expenditure in phase 1.
